What is this Steampipe plugin all about, and what is an ELN?

This document describes some use-cases and potential applications of 
Steampipe-generated dashboards in the field of research data management (RDM).

## Background

Within academic research, good RDM is essential. Some benefits of  RDM are:

* Ensuring that datasets generated from publicly-funded research are accessible after publication.
* Identifying research that may have commercial potential.
* Facilitating experimental reproducibilty by requiring experiments to be documented fully.
* Enabling research data to be discoverable by  suitable use of metadata.
* Ensuring data privacy/anonymity of sensitive data.
* Facilitating progress-reporting  to funding agencies.

Research data is a complex mix of large datasets (e.g. imaging), files generated by specialist software, Office documents/spreadsheets and freeform textual descriptions of experiments, perhaps written in paper notebooks. Traditionally, individual scientists or laboratories have developed their own RDM solutions, perhaps using cloud storage such as Dropbox, GoogleDrive or Evernote to store and  share data. This makes RDM at an organisational level extremely challenging due to the variety of services used, and the risk of data being siloed in personal accounts.

In recent years, research organisations increasingly look to more centralized management of research data. Electronic Lab Notebooks (ELNs) serve that need, by capturing research data as close as possible to its time of generation, and enabling easy search, navigation, sharing and retrieval of data. There is a burgeoning number of [ELN software providers](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-05895-3). Because of the variety of ELNs, suiting different research needs, an organisation often chooses to conduct pilot studies, inviting scientists to try out many ELNs, before formally supporting the  2 or 3 most popular.

RSpace is a popular ELN in the academic and early-stage biotech market. It has a [rich API](https://community.researchspace.com/public/apiDocs), and a [freely accessible version](https://community.researchspace.com/signup) making it well suited to developing client applications.

## Assessing ELN usage

Once ELNs are adopted and in use, there is a need to monitor how they are being used, for example:

1. How much data is being stored in the ELN over a given time period?
2. Is data being stored in a structured format that facilitates reproducibility?
3. Is metadata being added to facilitate discoverability?
4. Who is using an ELN? Are some departments/schools using it more than others?
5. Is the ELN being used in compliance with industry standards such as [21 CFR 11](https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/part-11-electronic-records-electronic-signatures-scope-and-application)?

While an ELN software itself may offer some reporting capabilities, the user interfaces may differ significantly, making it difficult to aggregrate and compare across multiple ELNs.

## Use case for Steampipe dashboards in RDM

Steampipe dashboards and controls could provide at-a-glance reporting of ELN usage. Such reporting could identify usage issues (for example, researchers not adding metadata) that could motivate staff to develop new SOPs or working practices. They could enable unified reporting across multiple supported ELNs.

ELNs are not an isolated tool, and may interact with other systems such as:
 
 * The institution's IAM system (increasingly using services such as Azure AD or Okta).
 * Long term data repositories for archived data, e.g. [Figshare](httos://figshsare.com) and [Dataverse](https://dataverse.org).
 * Specialist scientific software
 * Remote data storage such as S3 or institutional file stores

  Steampipe's SQL-over-API abstraction readily facilitates queries across multiple services, enabling questions like 4) above to be answered.

## Problems and challenges

In the field of cloud services, there are many sophisticated compliance standards (SOC1, FedRAMP etc). However, In RDM, these standards are not so uniform, nor so well defined, and there are no generally accepted standards of ELN usage. Therefore it may prove challenging to develop these controls and dashboards that are applicable to multiple research environments.

The ELN field is  small and niche, and not all ELNs have well-written APIs exposing their data. It may be difficult to extract similar information from all ELNs.

ELN companies are generally quite small and operating in a highly competitive market, with little or no collaboration between each company. While industry standards might  benefit the ELN market (e.g. enabling interoperability that would reassure customers they won't get locked into  a single provider), there seems little appetite for such collabortion at present.